He could have added fortune and fame, but caring for neither.
He found happiness and honor in being helpful to the world.
Those are the words found on the gravestone of George Washington, Carver,
an inspirational scientist who was once dubbed by time magazine as the black
Leonarda.
This was apropo as Carver regarded himself more as an artist to use natural
things rather than a true scientist cook stove.
Chemists was how he jokingly referred to himself and his research team at a
time of high racial tensions.
When he was part of a community that was still heavily marginalized and
discriminated against the talent and achievements of George Carver transcended
all color barriers and were appreci by the entire nation.
And despite all this most simply remember him as the peanut man.
His work with peanuts brought him the most success,
although even by Carver own admission, it was not his greatest work,
but everything he did,
he did with a purpose to help the furthest man down today,
we take a look at the full extent of the career and the legacy of
George Washington, Carver.
George Washington,
Carver was born in a small town called diamond Grove in Newton county,
Missouri to date known simply as diamond.
His birth date is a mystery because he was born into slavery.
The exact date was never recorded. It was sometime during the mid 1860s,
but before slavery was abolished in January 18, 65 later,
Carver said that it happens near the end of the war.
So 1864 is generally given as his year of birth,
right from the very beginning, Carver experienced great tragedy.
And we're talking about more than the obvious misery of being born as a slave,
his parents were marrying Gils and they were owned by a German American
immigrants named Moses Carver. His father died before he was born.
And when George was just an infant, he,
his mother and his older sister were kidnapped by Bush whackers and taken and
sold in Arkansas, Moses Carver high demand to get them back.
But he was only able to track down and recover.
George in exchange for a horse afterwards, slavery may have been abolished,
but the boy was still an orphan. Fortunately for him, Moses Carver and his wife,
Susan took George in and his older brother, James and raised them as their own.
George was a frail trial and he was often sick during his childhood.
Therefore he was two weeks who work on the farm with Moses and James.
So instead he helped Susan Carver around the home by doing chores,
cooking and tending the garden during their free time.
Susan taught him to read and write.
He showed an intellectual aptitude from a young age and his adoptive guardians
encouraged him to pursue an education. But around the age of 12,
George wanted to enroll at school. However,
he couldn't do that in diamonds Grove because it only had one public school and
it didn't accept black peoples.
Instead he traveled to the county seats of Nesha about 10 miles away.
From this point on, he left the kava farm more or less.
He would sometimes return and stay for a weekends. But other than that,
he kept moving from one place to another, to further his education.
It was also in the show that he first started going by George Carver.
And as up to that point, he kept referring to himself as Carver's George,
the Washington.
He added later in honor of a man who played an important role in his life due to
discrimination. Carver had to jump from one school to the next,
before finding acceptance. He even,
it managed to obtain high school diploma after graduating from Minneapolis high
school, then Minneapolis, Kansas from there,
George wanted to move on to college after being rejected by most of the
institutions he applied for Caral was finally accepted sight on scene by
Highlands college in Kansas. But they too later rejected him. Once.
They discovered that he was black, feeling a bit.
George gave up his dream of going to college for a while and instead claimed a
homestead,
which he farmed alone while simultaneously doing odd jobs and working as a round
Chan to support himself. He did this for a few years, but by the late 1880s,
Carver was ready to move on to something else.
He managed to secure a loan from a bank and he left Kansas making his way Iowa
in the city of interests.
He Mets and befriended a white couple called the mill Hollands who urged him to
continue his higher education.
Although reluctant at first Carver,
eventually relented and enrolled in a little Methodist school in India,
NOLA Iowa called Simpson college.
The time he spent there had a deep effect on George Carver,
not just from a career perspective, but also from a spiritual one.
It greatly strengthened his Christian faith.
As he finally found a place which accepted everyone regardless of race and
made him believe he was a real human being.
Carver studied a multitude of subjects at Simpson college,
but somewhat unexpectedly focused mainly on art, particularly painting.
This had been a passion of his as ever since he was a young man,
but his teacher at a bud did not think that a black man in that day and age had
a chance of making a decent living as a painter.
When she found out that Carver was also interested in plants,
she encouraged him to switch to botany and enroll at the Iowa state agricultural
college in Aimes. Uh, her father taught AutoCulture
In 1891.
George Carver became the first black man accepted at Iowa state university.
Now fully living his dream. He embraced all facets of campus. Life.
Carver was on the debate club, the athletics team. He was captain of the campus.
Military regimens.
He wrote poetry published in the student news were in two of his paintings were
even exhibited at the Chicago. World's fair in 1893.
But of course it was his agricultural work that earned him the most praise after
presenting his thesis in 1894, titled plants as modified by men,
Carver graduated and continued to study for his master's degree.
His professors were so impressed with his work that they asked him to begin
teaching as well.
His masters program saw Carver workers and assistant modernist for the college
experiment station, focusing on plant pathology, which is the study of disease,
implants and ology, which is the study of fungi.
During this time,
he wrote several papers on his works that were published and they started
garnering him a reputation as one of the countries, leading young scientists,
he completed his master's degree in 1896. Now that his education was complete,
Carver was ready to embark on a permanent career as a teacher and researcher.
He wasn't hurting for office,
but in the end he chose a young institu in Tuskegee,
Alabama that had only been established 15 years prior.
It was the Tuskegee Institute known today as Tuskegee university,
the passion project of prominent civil rights activist, Booker T Washington,
widely influential and respected among the elite circles of American society.
Washington wanted to set up a university that could provide a higher education
for black people without fear of discrimination.
He founded the Tuskegee Institute in 1881 with the help of donations from
industrialists,
such as Andrew Carnegie and John D Rae around the mid 1890s.
Washington had entered the second phase of his vision for his university,
which was to recruit the most talented black teachers and S it's in the country.
Obviously Carver was on his list and he clearly shared Washington's vision in
1896, kava moved to Alabama where he accepted a position with the agriculture
department at the Tuskegee Institute.
One that he would keep for the rest of his life.
You might expect that the pairing of Carver and Washington might be a match made
in heaven, but the two actually butted heads quite often,
those who knew them believe they had opposing personalities.
Washington was a pragmatist to set a goal and trying to accomplish it as fast as
possible.
Carver on the other hands was more of a dreamer who liked to fretted the time
away in his lab, either painting or looking after his plants,
as the director of the newly created agricultural experiment station,
George Carver expected his job to mostly involve research,
which was what he was interested in. However,
Washington also wanted him to manage the farms,
teach classes and serve on several committees and councils.
It was all the bureaucracy and paperwork that Carver loathed. Most of all,
he threatened to quit several times during Washington's tenure,
as president of the ski Institute,
the latter always managed to smooth things over, but he also flat out,
refused to give into some of Carver's requests,
such as giving up his teaching duties.
Despite the adversarial professional relationship,
the two had a healthy respect for each other and always spoke highly of one.
Another Carver would even later rad Washington to his name in honor of the civil
rights leader, besides his spats with university leadership,
Carver wasn't exactly popular with the other faculty members.
When he first came in,
either many of them resented the privileges that Washington offered him in order
to get him to come to Tuskegee.
This was still in the infancy stages of the university,
which did not have a lot of spare money to go around.
Other faculty members had to live two in one dormitory room if they were
unmarried and they made on average $400 a year,
Carver on the other hand had an annual salary of a thousand dollars plus
expenses and got two dormitory rooms all to himself.
Despite the various administrative obstacles that Carver encountered during his
time at Tuskegee,
they did not hamper his effectiveness as a scientist or researcher.
He decided that his efforts would be best spent helping the farmers of America,
particularly in the Southern states.
Carr believed that they would suffer in the years and decades that followed due
to their over Alliance on cotton.
The practice of growing the same crop in the same place year after year is
called mono cropping.
It is a problem because it depletes the soil of the same nutrients over and over
again, and leads to soil erosion,
which in turn will result in much poorer crop yields in the future. Cotton,
for example,
is quite a demanding crop that uses up a lot of nitrogen in order to grow,
to alleviate the issue of monocropping farmers sometimes practiced crop
rotation,
which simply involved alternating between different crops for subsequent growing
seasons so that the soil had time to build up its nutrients. Again,
George Carver was a big proponent of crop rotation, but he didn't invent it.
It had been practiced since ancient times,
but farmers from the American south had no interest in it because they regarded
cotton as the only cash crop around anything else would not have been as useful.
And therefore would've made less money at first,
Carver presented other ideas such as suggesting that farmers use commercial
fertilizer with a high nitrogen content,
or they buy a second use a two horse plow,
which would till the soul deeper,
these suggestions were seen as a bit to deaf coming from someone who didn't
truly grasp the situation in the south.
It wasn't that farmers were unaware of these solutions or that they were
ignorant of the problem caused by mono cropping,
but that they did not have any money to do anything about it.
The farmers that carved, uh,
aimed to help were all poor and many of them were black following the abolition
of slavery. Wealthy land owners gave them parcels of lands,
which they could work in exchange for a set fee or a percentage of the crop.
Their profit margins were raised of thin and even just one bad growing season
could cause them to lose everything and plunge them into crippling debt.
They had very few land rides and were up against a system which was completely
stacked against them.
It was a system of near slavery as one historian described it,
therefore since the land was never truly theirs. Anyway,
the farmers had almost no incentive to care about the health of the soil,
let alone spend whatever money they saved up in order to improve it.
Car soon realized the extent of the issues that plagued to the poor Southern
farmers.
So his research focused on other ways to improve their work that did not
necessarily require any serious investments. In this regard,
almost all the ideas he had while working at Tuskegee were published in the form
of bulletins. He issued 44 of these bulletins between 1898 and 1943.
The first one for example, was titled feeding acorns,
and it simply encouraged farmers to use acorns to fat up their livestock as a
cheaper alternative to corn that otherwise typically went to waste Carver's most
popular bulletin was number 31 from 1916,
which sought multiple reprinting titled how to grow the peanut into 105 ways of
preparing it for human consumption.
It was a list of recipes collected from other cookbooks, magazines, newspapers,
and agricultural bulletins.
Carver's educational efforts did not consist solely of these bulletins.
He still felt that his information was not reaching all of its intended
audience,
mainly because a lot of the farmers were illiterate or simply because they were
not expecting any kind of actual help from an official institution.
Carver decided that he needed a more direct way to bring education to these
people. And thus,
the Jessup agricultural wagon was born founded in 1906 by George Carver.
This was the first step in the moveable school outreach program of the
Institute.
And it was named after New York banker Morris Ketchum Jesser who founded the
program.
These wagons would travel from farm to farm with equipment and instructional
charts and give lectures to farmers on how to improve the quality of their soil
and alternate cotton with other crops approved successful enough that the United
States department of agriculture eventually adopted it for their own outreach
program.
I'm free.
Praise in order to convince farmers to willingly switch out their cotton with
other crops,
car needed to show them that it was possible for them to make a living by
growing other things. Thus the embarked on a new mission,
which was to research and develop new apple occasions for crops that he felt had
been overlooked. Of course, we all know about the most famous.
One of all the peanut in the minds of many finding 300 uses for the peanut is
still Carver's main claim to fame.
One of the main reasons why the agricultural scientist focused on this Legum was
because the peanut was quite adept at repairing the damage done to the soil by
cotton. Not only did it have MIGA nitrogen needs,
but it also could grow with relatively little water consumption.
As we already mentioned, 105 of those 300 uses were food recipes,
which he presented in his most popular bulletin. They included flour,
chili sauce, dry coffee, instant coffee, chop, soy sauce, mayonnaise, meatloaf,
Salado, buttermilk mock chicken, ma goose, vinegar, caramel cheese,
Fermento peanut wafers, and many, many more. Of course,
that was just the tip of the Pinot iceberg.
Carver also showed that the Legum could also be used to make various types of
feed for livestock plus dozen different types of beverages.
He used it for medicines, such as rut, a tonics and laxatives,
numerous cosmetics, such as shampoo, hand, and face lotions, shaving cream,
soap Pade and Duff cures. The peanuts was useful around the house as well.
Carver turned it into a laundry soap, leather dyes paints, wood.
Stains, and insecticide, various types of paper, metal, Polish, diesel fuel,
and gasoline rubber ink, Oleum, Aris, lubricating oil, and insulating.
Port. As you can see, the peanuts was an all perp, this practical crop,
but almost none of these ideas really took off after all Carver made no pretense
to have come up with all of them himself,
nor did he argue that they were superior to their alternatives.
That was not the point Carver's goal was to show Southern farmers and the
country as a whole, that it was possible to develop other cash crops.
Apart from cotton.
Given the carvers hundreds of uses for peanuts never became very popular.
It is a little strange that the two are so inexorably linked historians point
the finger at an obscure events from Carver's life.
When he gave an impasioned testimony before Congress,
it was the moments that permanently connected the scientist to the Legum in the
public minds. But then the event itself was forgotten.
So nowadays people remember the connection, but not its origins. Back in 1921,
the us government wanted to place a tariff on imported peanuts.
Carver testified before the us house ways and means committee and gave a
dazzling speech to bought the tariff.
In order to bolster the nation's own growth of peanuts,
the tariff was passed and afterwards Carver became somewhat of a media
sensation.
One more thing that should be specified about George Washington Carver's nutty
career is that he did not invent peanut butter. This might be a common belief,
but it's incorrect as peanut butter already existed.
By the time he started publishing his bullet. In fact,
the oldest references to the salty snack go all the way back to the Aztecs and
the inkers who made a paste out of ground up roasted peanuts.
The first to make modern peanut butter was Canadian chemist Marcella's Gilmore
Edson who patented the peanut candy. He called it in 1884.
The process was later refined by John Harvey, Kellogg of Kellogg, Syria,
or fame. And in 1903, Dr. Arose Straub invented a machine,
especially designed to make peanut butter.
According to Carver himself,
his research into peanuts was not the greatest work of his career, even.
So he never actively discouraged anyone from making the association between the
two, which is why he is still so closely associated with the peanut today.
He didn't mind the fame that he enjoyed in the last decades of his life.
After his testimony before Congress,
he believed that he could use it to advance his causes,
to promote the Tuskegee Institute and to encourage more racial integration
Carver's research into sustainable farming and ended up saving countless farmers
from ruin.
When the bowl weevil ravaged the Southern cotton crops at the start of the 20th
century, this past made its way from Mexico around 1892.
And in just a couple of decades, turned into a major threat,
not only to all the cotton crops in the country, but to the economy,
which was completely reliance on them.
This wave of evil as it was dubbed by the S D a did succeed in
destroying the financial state of the south.
Thanks to George Carver and others like him,
who advocated for crop diversification,
peanut plantation expanded from 500,000 acres in 1916 to over 4 million
acres in 1918, and continued growing from there.
The city of enterprise Alabama even has a monument dedicated to the bowl Weaver.
The first such structure in the world made to honor an agricultural pest.
They Dubbs the insect,
a Herald of prosperity and were grateful that it forced the locals to switch to
growing peanuts instead of cotton,
which triggered a period of affluence in the city. And it wasn't just peanuts.
Although the Legum was car's bread and peanut butter, if you will,
he saw the problem in trying to prevent mono cropping by simply switching one
crop with another crop.
Therefore he also advocated for the cultivation of other plants,
such as soybeans and pecans. He was a big supporter of the sweet potato,
almost as big as the peanut.
He saw many similar he's between them in terms of the benefit they would provide
to cotton farmers and how easy they were to grow while kava wasn't as
imaginative with the sweet potato.
He still found over a hundred uses for the root vegetable.
Some argued that George Carver's true legacy was that of a pioneering
environmentalist.
There is no doubting that the ideas he promoted about sustainability and
self-sufficiency had an a on the world around him, perhaps more significance,
if not more well known than his work with peanuts. In his later years,
Carver served as agricultural advisor to three us presidents.
He counseled Gandy on matters of nutrition and agriculture.
He taught Henry Ford how to make peanut rubber during world war II.
It might be a little hard to pinpoint what exactly George Washington,
Ava should be remembered for. But when he talked, people certainly listened.
He died on January the fifth, 1943, approximately 79 years old afterwards,
there was talk of establishing a national monument in his honor,
but due to world war II,
all such non-essential expenditures were banns by presidential order. However,
a Senator from his homes, state of Missouri,
sponsored a bill to make an exception in order to do honor to one of the truly
great Americans that Senator was future president Harry ES Truman,
and his bill was passed in both houses unanimously.
So I really hope you found that video. Interesting. If you did,
please do hit that thumbs up bottom below. Don't forget a subscribe also.
Why not check out another channel?
I do called business blaze it all about business, but I try to make it fun.
Check it out. Link below. Thank you for watching.